Parts V2 filter & loop -- two updates on a macro micro-looper

Parts has been broken into more parts for V2.  In the zipped folder, you will find two versions of Parts V2, titled "Parts V2 filter" and "Parts V2 loop" (as well as the original patch for archiving purposes).

Let's go over what they both share:

The DENSITY control finally works without CPU clipping!  Which means it might be worth a more thorough explanation of the control:  at 0, no loops will be recorded.  As density increases, the likelihood of a loop being recorded also increases.  At .5, new loop recordings occur most frequently.  But density also determines the likelihood of a loop being retriggered and held.  So, as you move past .5, new recordings again diminish, but retriggering likelihood continues to increase (this is especially true of pitched down loops, as these are longer and therefore have more opportunities to be overwritten).  When density reaches 1, again, no new loops are recorded, but loops that have been recorded can still be retriggered.

Separate WET and DRY levels!  With patches of this nature, where there are randomized elements and pitched-up looping, etc., separate levels are much more appropriate than a mix control.


Now, for the individual changes:

Parts V2 filter:

Introdues a TONE control.  This is a non-resonant low-pass filter that can be used to mellow out some of the pitched-up loops' chirpiness.  This is a simple, but effective way of making the patch much easier to blend in with other sounds.


Parts V2 loop:

This one is a bit more complicated.  A LOOPER is placed after the randomly recorded loops and before the reverb.  

Although it functions as a looper, it is actually composed of a delay line, which is always recording until it is activated.  Once activated, it will close the input of its buffer and recycle the buffer.  So, if Parts produces a passage you really like, you can activate the looper -- by tapping the MIDDLE stompswitch or by holding down on the MIDDLE stompswitch momentarily (this stompswitch uses a flexi-switch arrangement) -- after you hear the passage to capture it.  This works well with Parts' unpredictable output.

Once the loop is recorded, the MIDDLE stompswitch can be used to disengage the loop with a tap, or momentarily mute it with a press.  When it is muted, however, the looper begins recording again, so you can use this stompswitch to INSERT new material into the loop (or insert silences, if nothing is being produced by the patch).  This allows you to splice new material into the existing loop.

The RIGHT stompswitch acts as an overdub, or, as I think of it, an ADD function.  Because the looper only records the output of the patch's wet side, overdubbing suggests an intentionality that may be hard to actually implement.  But you can use the right stompswitch to continue to add and layer new sounds onto the loop (this will increase the loop's gain; but there is a LOOP LEVEL control on the front page).

It is very easy to make spliced, rhythmic loops with these methods, and to change them over time:  insert some new audio, add a new layer over the original loop and the new splice, tap a couple of times to insert silences, etc. etc.

The other control on the front page is a LOOP CLOCK.  This is a clock divider that controls the length of the loop buffer.  If set to 1/4, for instance, it will record four beats.  If you set it to 8/1, it will record for 1/8th the length of a beat, producing glitchy, stuttering results (layering these stutters with the ADD function can produce some very interesting results).


With firmware 2.0 , there seems to be enough headroom that I may attempt to unfork these forks in some future update and merge them, but because the patch is so computationally dynamic, I'm not rushing into that.  The previous version of this patch, which was prone to freezes in some conditions, has made me very cautious about pushing the CPU.  If you experience a freeze, please let me know.  I love this patch, and I want to get it right.


=========== Original patch notes ==============

10 (the macro part) loopers probabilistically record and play back (play once), depending on a “Density” control. The loops are randomly panned throughout the stereo field, and can be set to different pitches and reversed. After the panners, the loops passe through a reverb lite, for adding more spaciousness to the sound.

Part of my “Christopher invents patches to play music with him” series, the probabilistic nature of the loopers means that, although all loops are derived from a common clock source, they come in varying lengths, pitches and densities.

Additionally, longer loops can be retriggered (this is especially true of loops recorded at lower speed/pitches; a loop pitched down an octave is twice as long as its source), creating beds of loops, even though the loopers themselves are designed to only play once. This peculiarity allows certain themes and phrases to repeat, while others flutter quickly in and out of the sonic field.

I’ve had this patch for a couple of months, and it is one of my favorites; changes in density call allow you to build drama. Unfortunately, in certain conditions the patch clips the CPU (especially around density settings of .500); ten loopers being dynamically controlled by random modules leads to a very widely varying CPU usage. I’ve tried to ameliorate this as much as possible, and it is part of the reason I have not released this patch sooner. I’m hoping future optimization can provide enough CPU headroom to allow completely safe use of the patch (and maybe, just maybe, some high-pass filtering to take out some of the boomier bottom end).

Even with that caveat, in many settings the patch is stable, and I think, quite a lovely patch to play with and against.

The path is stereo throughout, although the panning may distort the left and right image received by the patch.

Controls:

Footswitches:

Left — tap tempo; MIDI clock is also accepted and will override tap tempo

Front page:

Down the left-hand side are five sets of controls for pitch and reverse. The loopers are paired, but aside from sharing a speed and reverse setting, they function entirely independently, recording on the basis of their own probability gate and being panned independently as well. The ganging of controls was a way of making adjusting the patch easier than having ten different sets of controls, and I think it works well as a compromise between efficiency and particularity.

The other controls on the front page are:

Density — controls the probability of a loop being recorded; for longer loops, as density increases, it also increases the likelihood of these loops being retriggered. (The patch may clip at density settings ~.500.)

Reverb — this is a macro that controls the decay and mix of the reverb lite, with the decay increasing somewhat faster than the mix control

Mix — a wet/dry mix

There is also a pixel to show the rate of the LFO that serves as clock for the probability gates.